the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer high quality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu let's get started drop date
is coming up so if you didn't do very
well in the midterm and you haven't been
doing your homework and haven't been
going to recitation I would strongly
consider uh drop date uh and you can see
your Tas to get some idea of what your
grades are uh and what you're likely to
do if you keep on you know per getting
the same performance you've had so
far now today we're going to switch
gears again and cover the last topic for
the course uh for the remainder of the
course we're going to talk about
probability it's one of the most
important subjects in all of math or
computer science in fact I was at a frat
last night for dinner and they asked me
what my favorite algorithm was and I
couldn't really think about what my
favorite algorithm was but in terms of
one of the most important subjects for
you to know about after induction it's
probably probability uh it's really
important across math and computer
science most of the upper level courses
you take in computer science are going
to use probability they're going to
expect you to know the basics you know
for example when you're designing
algorithms in 006 or 604 six uh you're
going to be designing in some cases
probabilistic algorithms algorithms that
flip coins or Generate random numbers to
get the result and by using Randomness
they run faster if you're doing software
engineering later you're going to use
probability when you analyze system
performance or build hash
tables uh probability is used in
information theory in coding theory in
cryptography in fact our nation's codes
their security depends on probabilistic
analysis because the bad guys are using
probabilistic algorithms to break the
crypto system and we'll give an example
of that in another week or
so probability is obviously important if
you're doing Game Theory or if you like
to gamble uh really critical in gambling
in fact we're going to analyze a lot of
different gambling games over the next
few weeks and for fun we'll play some in
class in fact we'll play one later today
and it's amazing how often
the intuition is wrong you think the
answer goes one way and then it's
actually the other probability is
important in the study of fall tolerance
for example how do you figure out the
probability there's going to be some
critical failure that causes the space
shuttle to crash or a critical failure
that causes a nuclear plant to melt down
that's done through probabilistic
analysis and we'll do some examples of
that probability comes up in everyday
life we just had an election and running
up to the election you get all these
polls that say that so and so is ahead
of so and so by three points with an
error of margin of error of Five Points
so it's a statistical Dead Heat is what
they say what the heck does that mean uh
in fact usually they've got it screwed
up and we're going to spend the
recitation where you're going to do a
margin of error analysis for a poll and
see how many people you need to pull to
get a pretty accurate
result comes up in medical
studies does cholesterol cause cause
heart disease does smoking cause lung
cancer how effective is a certain drug
say you get tested for a disease and it
comes back
positive well there's false positives
and false negatives what are the chances
you really have the disease so the list
goes on and
on uh in fact we're going to see all
these examples we got eight lectures and
eight recitations and there's just no
end of interesting examples where
probability comes into play
the bad news is probability is probably
the most
misunderstood subject in all of
mathematics and the
Sciences in fact Mark Twain once said
there's three kinds of lies lies damned
lies and
statistics meaning
probability because it's so easy to lie
with statistics and we're going to see
lots of lots of examples of that um in
fact newspaper articles you know have
all sorts of things that are just
horribly fallacious based on statistics
and we'll see examples in fact we're
going to even debunk a very famous
article published research paper by some
famous computer scientists at Berkeley
where they got to a conclusion using a
very standard method you see all the
time completely fallacious and we'll see
that so you can think of that as I'm
going to teach you how to lie with
Statistics even better how not to be
taken in by incorrect arguments using
probability
Theory now at MIT it's probably the
subject that most often trips up
students in their PHD qualifying exams
you know there's no better way than to
to strike Terror in the heart of a
student than to be sitting there and ask
them a question while they they're at
the board what's the probability that
Foo happens it's like Panic sets in when
they've got to do a problemistic
analysis and now MIT PhD students are
good you know they can crank out the
most horrendous calculation no problem
come up with really clever ideas to
solve problems but you get into
probability it gets into trouble in fact
even the other faculty sitting there
starts squirming around when this
question's being posed you know and um
there probability questions are and
we'll see some examples today are always
always the best at faculty parties just
can ruin people's whole night you know
what's the probability this happens and
it's some weird
answer um now the strange thing about
this well first strange thing is that
our human intuition is terrible and you
will see that uh you're intuition will
be wrong just the way our brains are
created you know
genetically but the good news is that
probability can be very simple if you
force yourself to just go to the basic
principles which we're going to cover
and go through the basic template of how
to solve a problem which we're going to
cover it is easy and you can't go
wrong the TR the key is forcing yourself
to just actually write it down follow
the basic principles and get to the
answer as opposed to saying oh the
answer's that and here's why because
it's amazing how often you'll be wrong
if you just try to rely on your
intuition now we're going to start today
our study probability with a uh a famous
simple game and the game is known as the
Monty Hall problem now do you all know
who Monty Hall was you're probably too
young yeah okay not many people know
Monty Hall was but back in the 1970s
there was a very popular daytime TV show
a game show called Let's Make a Deal and
it was the it was a great show it's the
precursor of Wheel of Fortune if you're
old enough to have seen that and then
Deal or No Deal after that there's
always some game show that's really
popular anyway back in the 70s it was
Let's Make a Deal and um Monty Hall was
the host how many people have ever heard
of Let's Make a Deal raise your hand if
you ever heard of that oh okay so it
still has some Fame good all right now
uh Monty Hall of course was the
precursor of Pat SE Jack of Wheel of
Fortune and Howie Mandel you know from
deal of No Deal and his assistant was
Carol Merill she was also famous as the
the beautiful assistant now and let's
make a deal the TV audience would come
dressed up in Wild
costumes and Monty would go into the
audience and pick out a contestant from
the audience based on how Wild their
costume was you know somebody that would
look interesting for TV and what he
would do is he'd buy a piece of the
costume maybe their hat or shirt or
something and give them a hundred bucks
for a piece of their costume and then he
would say
hey look you know if you give me back
the $100 I just gave you I'm going to
let you have your choice of what's
behind door number one door number two
or door number three or sometimes it
would be box number one box number two
and box number three now because people
had seen the game show before they knew
that behind one of the doors was a brand
new car or underneath one of the boxes
was a diamond
ring and behind the other doors were
goats or donkeys or something totally
useless so one of the three doors has a
big prize the other two got got
nothing um but because anybody would pay
$100 for a one in three chance at the
car they played and they're on national
TV so they give the $100 back to Monty
and they pick a door say door number
one Monty wouldn't open door number one
right away what he would do is say okay
you sure you like that all right uh
Carol can you please reveal what's
behind door number three so Carol opens
up door number three and there's one of
the donkeys sitting there or a goat
sitting there well now there's only two
doors left one of them has the car so
he'd ask the contestant well you've seen
the goat there's a car behind one of the
two doors do you want to stick with door
number one or do you want to switch and
get door number two and then the
audience is screaming you know switch
stick you know door number one door
number two you know the guy's wife there
screaming at him and everything and you
know he's got a you know he's got a pick
so he picks one and you know if he picks
the car well his wife's thrilled they
live happily ever after he's a hero on
national TV and if he picks the goat you
know he's looking at a divorce and you
know his career is ruined uh so it's
pretty important that he gets the right
strategy here now the question we're
going to look at
today is whether or not the contestant
should switch playing this game now
before we do the analysis we're going to
actually play the game in class I got
three boxes here uh the game we're going
to play is the same idea the prizes are
a little different instead of a diamond
ring or brand new car we've got uh $10
tusky gift certificates you know your
tuition only goes so far here um instead
of donkeys or goats we got something
much better the ever popular nerd Pride
pocket
protector uh and just to be
clear this is not the prize the gift
certificate here this is much much
better uh
now in terms of uh Monty Hall we don't
have him but you have me uh but I am
very happy to report that we're bringing
Carol Merill out of retirement she's
coming and making a special appearance
today I hope at
6042 do we have car
oh yes we have Carol that's
scary oh
Jesus
okay as you can see the years have not
been kind to
Carol and your tuition only does go so
far now we need uh three volunteers
we're gonna play the game three times
all right got a couple there want don't
you come down we got three volunteers
here all right we get the boxes set
up and Carol why don't you set those up
and load them up with uh there's these
are the gift certificates that's the
pocket protector there all right now
don't look you got to get back over
there so you can't see no no no he's got
the film going you know here we go all
right so uh Carol is going to put the
prize in one of the boxes and the pocket
protectors in the
other all right now I want you all to be
thinking you know what's the right
strategy here is it better to switch
does it
matter what are the chances of winning
one and three one and
two all right so who's our first
volunteer
here all right come on over we're going
to write your name on the board because
we're going to keep track of what
happens
here what's your name
Terren all right now first thing you got
to do Terren is pick a box as your basic
choice to start two number two
okay all right you picked number
two interesting
choice now uh Carol can you show him one
of the other boxes
all right which one was that you showed
there you revealed number
three and what was under number
three pocket protector oh God you may
never live this down Carol okay have EV
all right now Terren as you know one of
these has the gift certificate one of
them has another pocket protector and
now you got to decide are you g to stick
with number two or are you gonna switch
in fact class you know teren may need
some help here figuring this out so what
do you
[Laughter]
recommend he is going to
switch all right and Carol can you
reveal his prize
what did you get oh he gets the prize so
he
wins very nice okay so you get $0 at
tuskies well done who's next what's your
name chinua chinua how do I spell that
chin yeah all right easy okay now Chua
which we got new prizes loaded in there
all right now it may not be the same as
last time okay what box do you like
number three number three which one is
number three is that the one close to me
yeah that is okay number three all right
Carol can you show him one of the other
boxes
please Carol shows you number
two all right shinua what do you think
you want to stick or
switch you want to stick with three or
switch to one one had it last time right
switch he's going to
switch okay so that means you are
picking number one Carol can you show
him what he's
won another gift
certificate all right now Carol it is
okay to use a different box for the gift
certificate you we can move them around
all right who's our last contestant
what's your name Ty okay that's good uh
well yeah you got turn around no peeking
here okay Ty what's your first choice
one box number one yeah that's been the
one with the uh gift certificate for
sure Carol can you show
me another box way too many cameras in
this room this is not good for
[Laughter]
Carol okay Carol was revealed box number
two switch his work twice in a
row take them
both just
one we're getting some Theory here
now what do you think Ty
switch all right what
happened what do you know
all right now gentlemen I'd like you to
explain why each in turn why did you
switch why I switch it seems like the
maity what you're talking about
okay you have faith in these guys all
right how about you cha why' you switch
um I was told that it's more likely to
be if you switch and you believe what
you hear huh
sounding good yeah that 2/3 thing well
as you can see you're guaranteed to win
if you switch
right all right thank you very much
enjoy the ice cream okay so how many
people think it helps to switch raise
your hand if you think it helps to
switch how many people think it does not
help to switch raise your hand anybody
oh everybody likes the switch thing here
uh does this data help you decide
no anything could to happen with three
trials in fact we'll talk about
statistical inference and statistical
sampling later um if you switch what do
you think the odds of winning
are 100% okay who likes 100% raas your
hand well I got a couple uh how many
people think it's 5050 if you switch
yeah a lot how many people think it's
worse than 5050 if you switch not many
how many people think it's better than
uh that's most I think most of you there
pretty close all right now the answers
to these questions are very easy to work
out and we're going to do it we're going
to figure out the probability exactly if
you use mathematics but it's really
tricky if you try to use Intuition or
hand waving arguments now for example
this game Carol wants to leave yeah
Carol all right let's give Carol a hand
here she did a wonderful job well done
[Applause]
yikes oh man probably I'm G to get in
trouble here too now you know
this okay um for example this game this
particular version of it was the subject
of a series of articles in Parade
Magazine this is parade an old version
of Parade
Magazine and what I'm going to do is
hand out the series of Articles or the
TA are going to help me hand these
out there was three of them with a lot
of right ends here let me give you a
bundle
here here you
go here we go I'll give the rest a
Oscar
right now Merill has a column every week
in parade and people write in questions
usually about their love life and uh
weird things and she answers them and
she's well qualified to do this because
she's listed in the Guinness Book of
World Records as having the highest IQ
of a human being ever at
228 and so you know she's in some sense
qualified to answer any question that is
written in now in September of
1990 and we're passing out the Articles
now and it shows the first the first
article this guy named Craig Whitaker
writes in and asks Marilyn if you should
switch in this game so you can all read
that it says suppose you're on a game
show and you're given the choice of
three doors behind one door is a car
behind the others goats you pick a door
say number one and the host who knows
what's behind the doors opens another
one say door three which has a goat he
says to you do you want to pick door
number two is it to your advantage to
switch now Marilyn writes back saying
very plainly yes you should switch the
first door had a one and three chance of
winning the second door has a two and
three chance here's a good way to
visualize what's going on Suppose there
are a million
doors you pick door number one then the
host who knows what's behind the doors
reveals every other door but one and
777777 well it would sort of look like
777777 is the one with the car and you'd
switch pretty fast all right that's her
argument that is not exactly a proof
okay that the answer is you should
switch or that the probability is
2/3 all right now because she's giving
another problem with a million doors but
you got a problem with three doors and
as we'll in recitation tomorrow the
number of doors actually matters in
terms of some strategies
here um so people weren't convinced by
this and so if you look to the next page
you see people writing in there's a lot
of
rins the first one's by Robert Sachs who
is actually I I looked him up on Google
and he's on the faculty at George Mason
University uh I also noticed that in his
history he got his ba from har Harvard
so that should tell you something about
the quality of his response here he says
since you seem to enjoy coming straight
to the point I'll do the same you blew
it let me explain if one door is shown
to be a loser that information
information changes the probability of
either remaining Choice neither of which
has any reason to be more likely then
and so the answer is one half of having
the car then he says as a professional
mathematician I'm very concerned with a
general Public's lack of mathematical
skills please help by confessing your
error and in the future be more careful
just a little gratuitous extra statement
there uh next we've got a PhD from
Florida Scott Smith who says you blew it
and you blew it big since you seem to
have difficulty grasping the basic
principles that work here I'll explain
after the host reveals a goat you now
have a one and two chance of being
correct whether you change your
selection or not the doors the odds are
the same there is enough mathematical
illiteracy in this country and we don't
need the world's highest IQ propagating
more
shame well now this guy is right about
that one point about mathematical
illiteracy in the country uh the next
guy Barry Pastak you know lists himself
as California faculty Association he
actually was president of the California
faculty
Association he says your answer to the
question is an error but if it is any
any consolation many of my academic
colleagues have also been stumped by
this
problem okay so next page Marilyn writes
back you know and she says you know good
Heavens with so much learned opposition
I'll bet this is going to keep math
classes all over the country busy on
Monday and it did it was a huge uproar
at the time about this so now she tries
to explain it some more with shells and
stuff under the shells and so forth
trying to argue it um and then she says
just try the experiment six times or
something and you'll see you know but
it's not really convincing it's not a
proof she's sort of waving hands at it
to give you some idea why she thinks
she's right but when I look at the hand
waving here versus the hand waving on
those faculty well there it's all hand
waving all right so you go to the next
page and now the letters are getting a
little
nastier uh we got another University of
Florida guy he says may I suggest you
obtain and refer to a standard textbook
on probability before you try to answer
a question of this type
again then Robert Smith Georgia State I
am sure you will receive many letters on
this topic from high school and college
students perhaps you should keep a few
addresses for help with future
columns these are great uh now this next
guy Ray Bobo now he's a real guy I
looked him up too he it's not fake
that's his his real name and I got to
say if if my name was Bobo I'd think
twice before writing into Parade
Magazine you know especially if I'm
wrong anyway here's Bobo you are utterly
incorrect about the game show question
and I hope this controversy Will Call
some public attention to the serious
National crisis in mathematical
education well that's fair uh if you can
admit your error you will have
contributed constructively towards the
solution of a deplorable situation and
here's great how many iate irate
mathematicians are needed to get you to
change your
mind well that's proof by intimidation
right you know it's not here's the
reason why just so many irate
mathematicians said it they must must be
right ah the next guy I am in shock that
after being corrected by at least three
mathematicians you still did not see
your mistake as if three mathematicians
that's sort of the criteria for
correctness uh oh this guy's bad uh
maybe women look at math problems
differently than men
oo well maybe it's a good thing in this
case I don't
know uh oh then we have Glenn Caulkins
you are the
goat uh finally this guy uh US Army
Research Institute little scary you made
a mistake but look at the positive side
if all those phds were wrong the country
would be in some very serious is
trouble all right now Marilyn writes an
even longer response uh because she's
getting zillions of letters 90% voting
against her that she's wrong uh she
agains now suggests a nationwide
experiment so that Nationwide You' do
the sample a million times and get the
answer which really wouldn't prove it
either then we go to the last page
there's one last letter and this is what
finished the uh controversy in the Press
uh comes from MIT
you are indeed correct my colleagues at
work had a ball with this problem and I
dare say that most of them including me
at first thought you were wrong uh so
maybe that 50,000 a year somebody is
paying for education is worth something
because MIT came in and agreed with
her okay it turns out that Marilyn was
correct in her statement that you should
switch and that if you switch you have a
two-thirds chance of winning so if you
don't which you got a one-third chance
of winning uh provided that Monty is
guaranteed to open a door with a goat
you know and that's that's the
Assumption here and the proof is
simple although Marilyn's reasoning
wasn't so convincing I didn't think and
all those phds that wrote in with those
stupid letters that they're probably
intelligent people after all they got
Advanced degrees in mathematics and most
of them were faculty teaching
mathematics a little scary uh but they
just weren't
following the basic principles they were
following their intuition they didn't go
through the basic steps to figure out
the
probability so that's what we're going
to do we're going to go through the
basic steps now and see how to solve it
and we will use these steps to solve
pretty much every problem in
probability okay so the
key the first step is to look at the
sample space of possible
outcomes so let me define sample space
an
outcome the sample
space for an experiment or probability
game you can treat this Monty Hall game
as an
experiment is simply the
set of all possible out
comes things that could
happen in fact let me Define an outcome
also known as an atomic event or a
sample
point an
outcome also known
as a sample
point we'll use those terms
interchangeably
consists of all the information about
the
experiment including and that's after
after it has been performed
including the values of all random
choices for example
say we want to
know the probability of winning in Monty
Hall if you switch all right let's
figure that out so in that
case we're going to Define an outcome of
the Monty Hall
game or sample point
and I'm assuming in this case we know
you're going to
switch and the contestant
switches consists of three
things first the box with the prize
where did Carol put
it second the Box chosen by the
contestant and third the box that was
revealed once you know those three
things you know everything about what
happened all
right for example let's look at a
typical sample point
say I took sample point or
outcome
213 this is the outcome
where the
prize is in box two
the
player picks
first box
one and Carol
reveals box
three okay now in this case in this
outcome did the contestant win
yes because we're assuming for hence
forth for most the rest of the day we're
assuming the switch case because we're
going to analyze that so that's fixed
they switch they come in knowing they're
going to
switch so the prize is in two all right
prize is
here the player started here Carol
revealed three and when they switch I
got the prize so in this outcome the
player
won okay now does every three Tuple here
correspond to a sample point or a
possible
outcome no what's an example of a sample
point with numbers one two and three
that's not
yeah very good yep so for
example uh one two one is not a sample
point it's not an the set the uh sample
space because we can't reveal the box
with the
prize similarly
211 is not a sample point because we
can't reveal the box that the player
picked
yeah once or actually no if they're the
same right so if the player picked the
box with the prize which never happened
in our case for example
112 and 113 are both
possible right because you could put the
prize here the player could pick it now
Cara has a choice if ring two or
three
okay so these are okay
all right so let's figure out a nice way
of characterizing all outcomes in the
sample space now to do this we're going
to set up a tree and we're going to use
a the called the tree method to
construct the sample
space getting all the outcomes
all right so the first thing we do is
figure out where the prize
is and we'll represent that as sort of
like a decision tree there's three
choices it's in box one box two or box
three then the next thing is the box
that the player
picked and we'll continue our decision
tree here each of these now has three
branches and they're labeled one two or
three and then the last step is which
box is revealed
now in this case if the prize is in one
and the player chose one there's two
possibilities we could reveal two or
reveal three so we get one two here and
here what about
here priz is in box
one box two was
revealed uh sorry player picked box two
prizes in one player picks two how many
choices for which box is
revealed one and which box is going to
be
revealed
three all right this is sample point one
two
three and here we've got 1
three two is the only
choice all right and let's do maybe I'll
fill the whole thing out here
one three going to run out of space
but two two now this
splits into one and
three all right so we have
here 2 two
one 2
23 and let me uh the last one 2 three
one here
and now I'll bring these up over here
I've got
two then I've got three 2
one and finally I've got three three
with two
choices one and two
all right that is now the construction
of the entire sample
space all the possible
outcomes how many sample points are
there here how many possible
outcomes 12 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 okay uh let's see which ones
correspond to victory for the
player let's label each one is a win for
the player or a loss for the
player what's this
one yeah prizes and one the player chose
one where the prize was and then
switched away from it loss what about
this
one loss same reason what about this
one that's a win the prize is here the
player went there and switched so they
wound up there
wi and these are all winds for the same
reason
not this
one uh 221 the player got it right to
start with and then switched away that's
a loss
loss
win win win and here the player got it
right they switched away they
lose all right so we've labeled every
outcome as to whether the player who's
switching wins or loses how many sample
points lead to Victory
six one two three four five six out of
12 uh
oh was Marilyn wrong is it really Bobo
was right it's
5050 half the sample points lead to
Victory what's missing here
yeah first two are identical Chosen and
the Box chosen first each of those two
sample points coming from that are half
as the single sample points that's right
what we're missing here is the
likelihood of an outcome the probability
that this is what happens we're missing
one more thing and this is really
critical when you're making your sample
spaces you need to make sure you get the
probabilities assigned to each event
they're not necessarily equally
likely all right in fact what we need to
do is to construct the probability space
so let's define that
the probability
space
consists of a sample space which we've
already talked
about that's just all the
outcomes and a probability function
that maps and we call this function
usually PR uh we'll have sometimes it'll
be F or something like that um but PR
Maps the sample
space s to the real
numbers such
that first for every outcome
in the sample
space the
probability is between zero and
one of that
outcome and two if you sum up the
probabilities of all the outcomes you
get one so the sum over all
outcomes of the probability of the
outcome is
one all right so the sample space is all
the outcomes the probability space at in
has this extra thing the probability of
each outcome and really it could be
anything as long as the probability of
every outcome is between zero and one
and they all add up to one that's
it all right now there's a natural
interpretation of what the probability
function is and that is the probability
of a sample Point well should be the
probability of its outcome
and this is sort of where you get to
Maryland saying Hey try it a million
times and you'll see two-thirds of the
time roughly you get the right that you
win so for every
outcome the probability of that outcome
that real number should be the
probability that when you run the
experiment W is what happens
W will be the
outcome in other words if probability of
w were a
half what that means is if you you
should get that half the time roughly
speaking we'll get into really details
of that later in other words you toss a
Fair coin you flip it well you might say
a probability half of a heads right and
so that this function would then be
probability of heads is is one
now assigning the right probabilities to
the outcomes is 95% of the
work uh in fact if you screw that up
you're doomed just you can't get the
right answer so for example if we just
said okay each of these is probability
112th we'd get Bobo's answer is the
probability of winning so that's not too
good um now to get the right
probabilities for the Monty Hall problem
we have to make some assumptions
so let's write those
down so the first assumption we're going
to make is is that Carol put the prize
in a random box they're all equally
likely so the
prize is in each
box with
probability
one3 the next assumption we're going to
make is that the player didn't see which
box has the
prize okay in other words and more
specifically
no matter where the prize
is the player picks each box with
probability one3 so the player is making
a effectively a random choice
all right and there's one more
assumption we're going to make anybody
have any ideas about what's left to make
as an assumption
here
yeah I guess if Carol's the one who's
opening the bo she knows where all the
prizes are
yeah okay so what assumption should I
make yeah that she picks a box at random
if she has a
choice all right so we're going to make
that assumption so that no
matter where the prize
is if Carol has a
choice she
picks each box with probability one2
now why is this third one important why
might that really
matter anybody think of a reason why
that can be
relevant what if Carol had
some strategy in mind that the
contestant knew
about you think of why that might be
useful
were able to produce information based
off of that then there's higher figure
out yeah in
fact several years ago when I was
lecturing I said in fact it could make a
difference that there is a way that
Carol can convey information to the
player by of the two she's choosing
which one to pick like if she has a
choice of two or three say she always
picks the bigger one three well that
might tell you information about she
didn't pick two so maybe it has to Happ
or she I don't know um in fact that's
wrong and it doesn't matter in the case
of three boxes this assumption we're
going to make it because we're going to
do the analysis with it but for three
boxes you can show that it really
doesn't matter for this assumption but
if you go to four boxes it does and so
in recitation tomorrow you're going to
consider the four box version of this
game and if Carol has a strategy that
the player knows about you can improve
the player's chances of winning
all right but not for three it turns out
in any case when you're doing a setting
up a problem you got to set up your
assumptions otherwise you don't get
anywhere these are sort of like axioms
all right same kind of thing it's fine
to make assumptions just State what they
are now of course you also want them to
be
reasonable
uh all right so maybe we're gonna go
back now and figure out
how to get the probabilities of the
sample points or the outcomes for Monty
Hall let's go do
that and maybe I'll draw them in a
different color
here what I'm going to do is label every
edge with a probability associated with
taking that
step so if the box is if the prize is
placed in each box with probability one3
that says this happens with probability
1/3 that's 1/3 and that's
1/3 same thing here assumption two says
that no matter where the prize is say
it's in box
one the player chooses each box of
probably oneir so given that the prize
is in box one the player chooses one
with 1/3 two with 1/3 three with 1/3
same if the prize is in box two
so I label every edge here with a
probability all
right now I go to this level and I'm at
this note I'm in the state where priz is
in box one player selected box one so
Carol has a choice of two or three to
reveal and she's going to reveal each
one with probability a
half so I label a half on each of these
because that's what we've assumed
what probability do I put on this edge
here probability one because there's no
choice Carol has to do it same here and
I get a half a half
one uh one one a half a
half all right so I've labeled every
edge with its
probability pretty simple because it was
all
assumed now I've got to get a
probability for each outcome
and we do that with the following
rule the
probability of a sample
point is the product
of the
probabilities
oops on the path leading to the outcome
the path in the
tree leading to the
outcome or the sample point
okay so what this says is just really
really
simple the probability this sample point
is a thir time a thir times a half
118 probability of this sample point is
a thir A3 * a thir * a half 1
18th what's the probability of this
sample Point going to be
here 1 nth I get a thir time a thir
times well this guy was
one is 1
nth um the next one here is a third time
a thir * 1 1
nth same thing here a thir * a thir * 1
is a
9th then I get a third time a thir time
a half for eight
and I keep on
going this will be a
ninth uh this one is a one so it's a
9th a 9th an
18th and an
18th okay now that's the rule and you
always do this you can sort of see why
it works you'll understand after another
week why for sure why it works but
intuitively
you know to get to this outcome these
are the choices we had to make first the
Box had to be sorry the prize had to be
in box one there's a one in three chance
of that happening now in those one out
of three
chances the chance to player also picked
box one onethird of the time of onethird
of the time that
happens right a third of the time you're
here and of that a third of those times
you get to he that's a third times a
third or a ninth and then a half of
those times Carol happened to reveal box
two that's an
18th all right so do you see why that
might make sense why you're multiplying
these because at every step you have a
chance to diverge and the probability
you take the step that we're following
here say in this case a half that cuts
down the chance you land here by that
probability
one2 any questions about that
right for now you can take it on faith
we'll
see why after we do a few more of these
over the next week or
so any questions there is that
okay okay oh yeah all
right on this one only one choice so it
happens with probability
one now
any other
questions okay all right uh so now we
can figure out the probability of
winning well probability of winning is
we have a ninth a ninth there's three of
them four of them five
six right so the probability of winning
here is 6 * 1 9th
because you just sum up the
probabilities of the winning sample
points there's six of winning they're
each one nth and that's 2/3
okay so Marilyn was right there's a
two-third chance of winning if you
switch and now this is a formal argument
that gives you that answer and the nice
thing is it works for pretty much every
problem you ever think
about now in general if you want to know
the probability of any event you can
follow this same method and let me
Define what an event
is an event
is simply a subset of outcomes a subset
of the sample
space for example we could Define the
event of
losing let's call eel Isabel to be the
event that player loses the player
loses with a switch
strategy all right now to compute the
probability of an event we just add the
probabilities of the outcomes in that
set all right let's that down
all right
so
formally the
[Music]
probability that an event occurs
is simply the
sum call an event e let's say an event e
it's a subset of a sample space the
probability that e occurs is the sum
over the sample points in E of the
probability of those sample
points so for
example the probability of the event e
where the player
loses well there's six sample points
where the player loses each with
probability 11/
18 so it's
1/3 is the probability the player loses
on the switch strategy and that's not
surprising because you either win or you
lose the probabilities have to add to
one so if you won with probability 2/3
you lose with probability
one3 okay
all right so Marilyn was right much
better to
switch um we'll do a bunch more examples
with Monty Hall tomorrow are there any
other questions on Monty
Hall change gears
yeah so You' shown that when you switch
you um like you're more likely to win
than to lose but you didn't show that
that's not also true when you don't
switch ah good question what happens if
you're playing the stay strategy
didn't
show right maybe you win two-thirds of
the time when you stay maybe maybe not
right because if
I win when I
switch what would have happened if I'd
stayed I'd have
lost because if I win when I switch it
means the prize is over there so if I
stay I'm going to
lose which means that if I do the stay
strategy I'm going to lose two-thirds of
the
time all right so you're right I didn't
cover that but we can it's not too hard
in this case because the probability of
winning on a
switch equals the probability of losing
on a
stick so the probability that you win
with
switch equals the probability you
lose with
stick
strategy all right and they're both two3
because they're the same this is two3 so
in fact the chance what's then the
chance you win with the stick
strategy
oneir and that's sort of you know where
Marilyn was coming from because she said
well if you pick the box right the first
time which is what you need to get to
win with a stick strategy well the
chance you pick the right box is one and
three
and showing them you know a goat over
here didn't matter it's still one and
three now that's gets a that in that's
intuition but it can get you in trouble
because say you you picked this box and
Carol showed you both of these boxes and
they had pocket
protectors then what do you know about
the probability you you won with a stick
It's one oh so things did change there
all right so you have to be a little
careful about how you reason okay uh you
got to do this stick with that stay with
that and you'll always be fine for your
strategy so the really the key is to
resist the temptation to just sort of
use your intuition to think about
it all right now this is a pretty simple
example um so now I'm going to do one
that's a little more interesting and a
little more devious in a sense so I need
a volunteer we're going to do a gambling
game so I need a
volunteer all right now he's raised his
hands before I even said what the
criteria are uh first you got to be
confident you understand
probability well you can fake it but
second and more importantly you got to
have some money in your
pocket or you got to borrow someone the
way down you got a few bucks there yes
all right come on down that's really all
that matters you know
okay
now in this game there's three
dice yeah well that's because you're
smart okay so let me show you the dice
in this
game
oops and these of course are not normal
dice
all right so dice a has a two a six and
a seven and they're the same on the
reverse side so it's a six-sided die and
it's fair when you roll it the
probability a comes up two is going to
be a third all right same for six and
for seven
oh we're just getting started all right
dice B has a one five and a nine and
dice C has a three four and an
eight all right so I got they're all
different numbers the numbers from one
to
nine so just so we're really clear the
probability that a comes up three is a
third the same for the probability a
comes up six is a third and so
on ah yes I do mean two good all right
good you're paying attention that's good
some hope all right now here's the game
we're each gonna pick a die and we're
gonna roll our die and the higher die
wins we're going to roll them once the
higher one wins and the loser pays the
winner a dollar and uh no tears
okay got that that was good he's already
trying to figure out which one to pick
uh so let's put your Dollar on the table
here we go I have a five do you have
change uh I might have
change all right let see
here yes I do have change you have a
dollar all right well for now anyway
let's put the dollar
there on the table it's GNA be a 20 next
is oh we're just getting warmed up here
okay now uh there is What's Your Name by
the way will will okay nice nice to meet
you will here we go all right now there
is one problem here I don't really have
those
dice so we're going to have to do a
mathematical version of this bet oh
you're always gonna win then so what
we're GNA do is pretend that we did a
roll head tohe head and whichever one is
more likely to win we're gonna assume
the role came out that way all right now
I know you've been studying those three
three guys there those three dice I'm
going to be fair and let you pick first
which one you like like and now as you
as you look at this you know think about
you guys can help him out here if you
can figure out which one's best this has
got a couple good siiz numbers you know
two of these beat these this has the
biggest number but well it's the
smallest this has two to two small guys
in it you know and you want to pick the
one that's
likely they do all out to the same thing
that's true
yeah which one do you want
on no he's pick
first all right what which one do you
want here
will what's your best
one a does look pretty good you got two
solid numbers
[Music]
thereat a looks like it beats up on C
pretty good
that's probably
true I don't know a a looks pretty good
to us which one you like here well we'll
try them out there we'll play more games
okay A a all right will likes a
all right and I'm G to
pick uh I'm going to go with see I'm
going to give you a Fighting Chance
right because we figured a beat C for
sure right because you got a couple six
and seven beat up three and four pretty
good and yeah I I'm going to pick
C all right and now we're going to do
figure out which one's more likely to
win and we're going to make the tree
diagram all right so here's a
you've got two six and seven of your
choices and they're each
1/3 and then for mine I've got 3 Four
and8 3 four
and8 three four and eight and they're
all one third
chance all right so I make my tree
here and get squished at the bottom
they're all
oneir all right now we're going to see
who wins C or a there's nine outomes who
wins this outcome you the whole top oh I
do yeah I get all these that's good
you're in trouble already what happens
here though who wins
that you six speeds three six speeds
four you win those I got you here all
right then you win seven beats three
three a wins seven beats four a wins
it's tied but oh my eight beat your
seven all right so let's see
here there's one two three four five for
me each at a
nth all right
[Music]
so I'm gonna
win right now in this case the sample
space is uniform every probability is
the same for the outcomes they're all a
nth a third time a thir a thir time a
third all right and so that's a case
where we say the sample space is
uniform don't go anywhere we're g to do
some more
here the sample space is
uniform if every sample Point has the
same probability
in which case the probability of the
sample point would be one in the
cardinality of the sample space in this
case there's nine points that each have
probability 1 nth and in this case C
beats
a with
probability 5
9ths all right that means I win the
dollar all right so uh you have some
more money in there that wallet I might
change for you so what we're going to do
is play
again and you've learned something now
that c beats a so we play again you're
probably not going to want to pick pick
a fact C is surprisingly good
there now I'll let you wager more if you
want to win your dollar back you want to
do double or nothing
so you you always get to pick second
though yeah yeah I'm gonna I gotta be
fair here I gotta let you pick
first so all you got got a couple Buck
we'll do double or nothing what do you
say I'll make change for you there you
go here here's five bucks I'll change
your five and then we'll bet two how's
that actually I got a $2 bill here here
we go wait got two bucks
there we go all right double or nothing
uh will what do you like you know you're
not obviously not going to pick a that
just got beat by C what do you like B or
C wow one of them's got to be best one
of them's got to be best here you just
got to figure out which one it is it's a
tournament I feel like
everyone
would
I so I I won't pick a that's for
sure that's good you figured out you're
screwed
here that's very
good all right so uh yeah so he's sort
of he's doing great he's figured out
because he went through this sort of
like this method what all the possible
outcomes were and he's discovered that
no matter what he picks I'm going to
beat him all right so let's see why
that's the case so let's see so because
you figured it out I won't take your
money this time well we'll do some more
in a minute so say will picked uh say he
picked
C and say that then I will
pick
B all right so on C there's three
choices
three four and eight and then on my
choice of B there's one five and
nine all right so I get one five and
nine and now we can see who wins here
well C wins
there loses here loses there C wins here
and B wins the next two then C wins
these and B wins the Ty
breaker so B beats C with probability 5
9ths all right so you don't want to pick
a you don't want to pick
C you want to tie a bet with
B I mean look you got B beats C we just
showed that c beats a I mean that's a
sure bet if I ever saw
one what do you
think yeah
still so if you pick B what am I I going
to do well you going pick a I'm going to
pick a let's see how that works
out all right so B has one five and nine
a
is yeah two six and
seven okay so well you're going to lose
all three there a wins
those a wins
uh no you win B wins there but a wins
the next two and then you win the last
three so a
oops a wins again five n of the
time so how is this possible we've got a
beats B beats C beats a all five NS
how is that possible did we make a
mistake well why isn't it possible
whoever said probabilities were
transitive right I mean You' sort of
think there's a best of the three die
but for any one that you pick that he
picks I can find one that's better and
it goes in a
cycle all right so you'd think picking
first you got a shot to pick the best
one but picking second always wins this
game if you pick the right
one all right you know since you did
good and figured that out I'm going to
give you a special opportunity
here all right now I'm gonna let I'm
Gonna Let You Go
second all right so I'm gonna pick one
and I'm gonna let you pick after me and
then we're gonna bet there's going to be
a little twist to
it but you want to pick second right I
don't know what you do after that though
yeah all right well let me tell you what
I'm going to do you know just to make I
want to do a different analysis we
already did these three so what I'm
going to do is an analysis where we we
roll them twice you know otherwise it's
the same basic thing but I want to do an
analysis with more outcomes here because
we sort of beat this to death so I'm
going to go first and
um let's see what what do I want to
pick well what should I pick if I'm
going to do this I guess I'll
pick B all right so I'm going to pick B
here all right how much you want to bet
here I'm GNA let you win your money back
I'll let you bet up to 10
bucks your
choice what what do you want to bet here
we got to put some money on the table
make it a little interesting so you pick
one I pick another yeah you pick you R
you roll a different after that
no same ones the die don't change I'm
picking B and I'm going to roll it a
couple times and I'm going to add up my
score and then you get to pick whatever
die you want I'm going to let you pick I
mean I'm going to let you pick the one
that beats it you roll yours a couple
times and now we see which one has the
higher sum who's more likely to win the
total like if you roll a n and n and i r
seven seven yeah then I'm going to win
cuz I get 18 you got 14 if I roll a nine
and a one I get a 10 you roll a six and
a seven you beat me at
1 all right so which one do you want to
pick you could Pi see but you got put
put the money on the table
here whatever you want to bet you know I
want to give you a chance to win your
money
back no what's the probability he's
going to
lose got a te card well what else you
got in
there I'll take the Shaw's card we can
what's that worth
that's worth a few bucks here all right
so
uh I'm picking
B which you
picking I really got his head messed up
now dos on the table take that and run
yeah we already saw it I give you a hint
here a beats B five nths of the time a
comes up higher than b so if we roll
them twice your odds got even better
than a beats B
all right all right so will goes with a
will that was a big
mistake all right now how how could it
be a mistake a beats B five nths of the
time now what we're gonna do is make the
decision tree we roll B twice we roll a
twice all right let's see what happens
it's this is a nasty one to write down
in fact you'll start seeing this when
you do these tree method things
sometimes the trees get a little hairy
so we got a sort of approximate a little
bit so here's B right I got five and N
for my first
roll and then I got one five and N for
my second
roll and I add these up
yeah yeah see if you read the notes
ahead sometimes that helps uh six here
are my outcomes these are the numbers
I'm going to
get all right these are my my nine
values your nine values you got 2 six
and
seven then each 2 six and seven
again so we add those up you got 4 8 9 8
13 9 13 and 14 and now we have each one
of these against each one of these
because there's 81 outcomes I got four
levels to the tree and rather than draw
four levels of this three are tree to
get 81 outcomes I'm going to say that
each one of these corresponds to this
tree right that has nine leaves and now
we can just count up how many times I
win I only get twoes well two got
nothing that's a
zero let's see how many times six wins
one one
time 10 one two three four five
all right got that six wins we already
decided
once 10 we decided already wins five
times 14 wins 1 two 3 four five six
seven eight and ties once a tie
one 10 we already got was
five 14 we already got was eight in a
tie and finally I get 18 wins every
time so let's add this up I got 17 22 30
35 36 41 42 times plus half the ties out
of
81 how much money is on this Shaw's
card oh smart
guy how did this happen
a is more likely to beat b higher than b
but you roll them twice and it's less
likely to be as large on the Su well why
not it's just our intuition is all
screwed up but the math is
straightforward in fact an amazing thing
happens if you roll them
twice they reverse completely a is worse
than b is worse than C is worse than
a if you roll them twice if you roll
three times something else happens in
fact it was known for a long time that
this phenomenon happens with one roll
and when I was making lecture notes a
few years ago I noticed they reverse
with two roles and then we did a class
project to discover what happens with K
rolles and it turns out that you can get
every possible combination you know in
some number of roles a beats both b and
c and b beats C other Comm number of
roles a beats them both and C beats
beats B and then motivated by that some
researchers out in San Diego showed that
there's arbitrarily strange
dice uh now not with just three sides
but with more
sides such that for any tournament
remember a tournament from graph Theory
where you everybody beats you know
between a pair of players one player
wins you can make the relation for any
tournament show up for a particular set
of dice by Rolling a certain number of
times all right which is just really
fascinating you can prove that so these
dice can get arbitrarily weird in terms
of which Dy is likely to come up and be
better than another die all right that's
it for today let me give you your money
back here and I got a gift certificate
you can have for being a good
sport here you go how much money did I
take here I think only like $2 $2 all
right there you go very good
thanks so we'll do a lot more examples
over the next week or two